# INTRO

Here I will show the intuition behind the analysis (for the moment it is better to not look at the code because it is ugly).

We start by considering two following functions which we expect to yield the same result:

```
fun foo(Int a) -> Bool:
	if a<11:
		if a>5:
			return true
	return false
```
and
```
fun foo(Int a) -> Bool:
	return a<11 and a>5
```

It is trivial to show that in both the result should be:

```
a_TRUE : [6,11)
a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,MAX_INT)
```

Where we use the parenthesis convention introduced by the [llvm::ConstantRange](https://llvm.org/doxygen/classllvm_1_1ConstantRange.html) class.

# FIRST

Now we start from the first function because it is easier to see conceptually.

Now we look at the ir generated by the rlc compiler with flags `--flattened --hide-position`:

```
%3 = rlc.flat_fun "foo" (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool ["a"] {
  } {
  ^bb0(%arg0: !rlc.int<64>):
    %4 = rlc.ref @rl_can_foo__int64_t_r_bool : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool
    %5 = rlc.call %4 : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool(%arg0) {is_member_call = false} : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.crb %5 !rlc.bool ^bb2 ^bb1
  ^bb1:  // pred: ^bb0
    rlc.abort
  ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb0
    %6 = rlc.constant 11 : i64 !rlc.int<64>
    %7 = rlc.less %6 : !rlc.int<64>, %arg0 : !rlc.int<64> -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.crb %7 !rlc.bool ^bb4 ^bb3
  ^bb3:  // pred: ^bb2
    rlc.br ^bb7
  ^bb4:  // pred: ^bb2
    %8 = rlc.constant 5 : i64 !rlc.int<64>
    %9 = rlc.greater %8 : !rlc.int<64>, %arg0 : !rlc.int<64> -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.crb %9 !rlc.bool ^bb6 ^bb5
  ^bb5:  // pred: ^bb4
    rlc.br ^bb7
  ^bb6:  // pred: ^bb4
    %10 = rlc.constant true !rlc.bool
    rlc.yield %10 : !rlc.bool
  ^bb7:  // 2 preds: ^bb3, ^bb5
    %11 = rlc.constant false !rlc.bool
    rlc.yield %11 : !rlc.bool
  } {is_member_function = false}
```
To undersand what the analysis does the focus should be on the operations `rlc.crb %7 !rlc.bool ^bb4 ^bb3` and `rlc.crb %9 !rlc.bool ^bb6 ^bb5` because those control all the flow of the program.

So since it is a backward analysis let's start from the last of the two: 

`rlc.crb %9 !rlc.bool ^bb6 ^bb5`

The trick when we arrive in this operation is to "peek" at the next blocks because we need to distinguish four cases:

```
branch_true_yield_true
branch_true_yield_false
branch_false_yield_true
branch_false_yield_false
```

Because if we find ourselves in one of the four cases we need to perform different updates to our variables.

So we peek in the lattice in the two branches and we will see something like this:

```
^bb6:
    constant TRUE
^bb5:
    constant FALSE
```

Because we first observed that in those basic blocks we were returning a constant value.

So since we need to update the values it is obvious that our boolean values should be (we can just look at the lattices and check for the constants) :

```
branch_true_yield_true   = 1
branch_true_yield_false  = 0
branch_false_yield_true  = 0
branch_false_yield_false = 1
```

Here we are sure of all the constants because we could say that the next basic blocks are terminators of the function.

Then if we want to update the information about the value in the lattice that should become:

```
^bb4:
    a_TRUE : [6,MAX_INT)
    a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,6)
    constant TRUE
    constant FALSE
```

Where we note that the operation %9 is just `a>5` and we added the two constants because they will need to be carried over in the analysis by joins.

Ok so now we can pass to analyze the operation `rlc.crb %7 !rlc.bool ^bb4 ^bb3`.

We should use the same technique and peek in the lattices of the successors:

```
^bb4:
    a_TRUE : [6,MAX_INT)
    a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,6)
    constant TRUE
    constant FALSE
^bb3:
    constant FALSE
```

And remember that at this point in time (before analyzing the operation) the lattice is the join of the two.

So if we compile the table of the yields now it becomes:

```
branch_true_yield_true   = 1
branch_true_yield_false  = 1
branch_false_yield_true  = 0
branch_false_yield_false = 1
```

Then the final update that will be applied is the one relevant to `branch_true_yield_true` (why ? it is a peculiar detail because both branches can yield false, so by default also the a_FALSE will be set to TOP). Which will transform the lattice into :

```
^bb4:
    a_TRUE : [6,11)
    a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,MAX_INT)
    constant TRUE
    constant FALSE
```

Which yields the expected result.

# SECOND

Now the IR of the second function is:

```
%3 = rlc.flat_fun "foo" (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool ["a"] {
  } {
  ^bb0(%arg0: !rlc.int<64>):
    %4 = rlc.ref @rl_can_foo__int64_t_r_bool : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool
    %5 = rlc.call %4 : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool(%arg0) {is_member_call = false} : (!rlc.int<64>) -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.crb %5 !rlc.bool ^bb2 ^bb1
  ^bb1:  // pred: ^bb0
    rlc.abort
  ^bb2:  // pred: ^bb0
    %6 = rlc.uninit_construct !rlc.bool
    %7 = rlc.constant 11 : i64 !rlc.int<64>
    %8 = rlc.less %7 : !rlc.int<64>, %arg0 : !rlc.int<64> -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.builtin_assign %6 : !rlc.bool, %8 : !rlc.bool
    rlc.crb %8 !rlc.bool ^bb3 ^bb4
  ^bb3:  // pred: ^bb2
    %9 = rlc.constant 5 : i64 !rlc.int<64>
    %10 = rlc.greater %9 : !rlc.int<64>, %arg0 : !rlc.int<64> -> !rlc.bool
    rlc.builtin_assign %6 : !rlc.bool, %10 : !rlc.bool
    rlc.br ^bb4
  ^bb4:  // 2 preds: ^bb2, ^bb3
    rlc.yield %6 : !rlc.bool
  } {is_member_function = false}
```

And here we can notice the main difference is that we do not have any constant TRUE or FALSE, so we cannot use the same trick we used before to update our table

```
branch_true_yield_true
branch_true_yield_false
branch_false_yield_true
branch_false_yield_false
```

Then we need to find and equivalent way of representing the constants using what we have now (which are mostly rlc.uninit_construct).

Now to be precise I decided to use an assumption which for the moment holds but maybe can be relaxed: 

*I will perform the checks not on the rlc.crb but on the rlc.builtin_assign because I assume that each rlc.builtin_assign will later be used in the same basic block in a rlc.crb operation.*

But this obviously does not hold in the first basic block that we are going to analyze ^bb3 because there is no crb.

And so I needed a more precise assumption:

*I will perform the checks not on the rlc.crb but on the rlc.builtin_assign because I assume that each rlc.builtin_assign will later be used in the same basic block in a rlc.crb operation **if the block has more than one successor**.
**If it has just one successor** then it will be used in a rlc.yield operation.*

By knowing this, we can start to look at operation `rlc.builtin_assign %6 : !rlc.bool, %10 : !rlc.bool`.

Here since the block has only one successor I can just call an equivalent operation: `rlc.yield %10`.

Which gives obviously the resulting lattice:

```
^bb3:
    a_TRUE : [6,MAX_INT)
    a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,6)
    uninit_construct %6
```

It is better to keep track of the uninit_constructs in the lattice since they are important when using multiple variables (which requires some more thinking to do, if you want I can write what happens with them too).

So this was pretty easy, then we pass to `rlc.builtin_assign %6 : !rlc.bool, %8 : !rlc.bool`.

Since the operation will be used in a rlc.crb we can look at the lattice of the successors, as we did before:

```
^bb3:
    a_TRUE : [6,MAX_INT)
    a_FALSE: [MIN_INT,6)
    uninit_construct %6
^bb4:
    uninit_construct %6
```

And here is where the magic happens: we need to extract the same information as before, which is compiling the same yield table but we do not have constants now.

Then what I thought about is: ok let's start from the false branch, which contains only the uninit_construct %6. This case is possible only when I will immidiately return the value obtained by the false branch. So it is equivalent to a constant FALSE (because the branch was evaluated to false).

Then we can for sure compile our partial table:

```
branch_false_yield_true  = 0
branch_false_yield_false = 1
```

And now we need to understand the branch true will bring us to.

But we can use a slightly more different reasoning: here we can see that the uninit_construct %6 is relevant because is present in the true lattice, and also we can see that there is aready the variable a which can return both true and false.

So we can update the rest of our table as

```
branch_true_yield_true  = 1
branch_true_yield_false = 1
```

Which is the same as the function before and therefore it will perform the same updates and **yield the same correct result**.

# NOTE

The logical function I used before is slightly more complicated (and should be formalized better) because again of the presence of multiple variables, for the moment it works but what I should do is formally prove that in our interested testcases the yield table will be the same (by applying the logical function to the lattices).

